We may be living in a golden age for cat owners looking for fancy litter boxes or designer perches, but choosing the right food for our feline friends can still be surprisingly difficult, due to confusing labels and the lack of transparency required of food companies. “Owners are trained to look at the ingredient list as the only way to judge the quality of pet food,” says Martha G. Cline, a certified veterinary nutritionist at Red Bank Veterinary Hospital in New Jersey. “But it doesn’t tell you anything about the quality of that ingredient or the nutrient provided in that ingredient.” Jennifer Coates, a veterinary expert at Chewy, says cats need more protein than many other species and stresses that the protein “should be sourced from animals.” But aside from noting the kind and amount of any cat food’s animal protein, the labels on many brands won’t give you much useful information, according to the professionals we spoke with.

Fortunately there are a few resources out there that can help you better choose your cat food. “Probably the most important part when you’re buying [food] for your pet is looking for the nutritional-adequacy statement and making sure it’s for the appropriate life stage for your pet,” says Cline. All pet food should have a nutritional-advocacy statement from the American Association of Feed Control Officers (AAFCO) noting whether they meet the standards for growth (good for kittens), adult maintenance (for maintaining a healthy weight), or all life stages (any age). Several vets we spoke with also pointed us to the World Small Animal Veterinary Association (WSAVA)’s tool kit with questions pet owners should ask when they’re shopping for cat food, including about the percentages of protein, fat, and carbohydrates in a particular food (this data isn’t required on labels). After asking many of these questions herself, veterinarian Lisa Pierson compiled a thorough chart of the nutrient profile for hundreds of cat-food flavors. As for what to look for on that chart, Jennifer Berg, founder of Tribeca Veterinary Wellness, says “more protein than fat, and then very little of any kind of carbohydrate is what we feel is probably ideal.” She advises looking for food that’s at least 45 percent protein and less than 10 percent carbohydrates, noting that nutrient profiles can vary widely between flavors of the same cat-food brand, so be sure to check the chart for each individual flavor.

With obesity and related conditions like diabetes on the rise among cats, you’ll also want to make sure your kitty isn’t eating too much. To maintain a healthy weight for your cat, vets suggest canned (or wet) food, which is less calorically dense than dry food, and feeding two to three times per day on a regular schedule, rather than just leaving the food out. “Kitties should not be grazing all day, every day,” says veterinarian Karen Becker. “We cannot leave a bowl of food out and expect them to maintain their body weight.” Some vets we spoke with say it’s fine to feed cats a mix of dry and canned food, but the consensus seems to be swinging in favor of wet food, not only because it contains fewer calories but because it’s richer in moisture (cats don’t have much of natural thirst drive, so it’s important to ensure that they’re getting enough water from their food). With the consensus on wet over dry food in mind, below are the best canned foods you can feed your feline friend, based on our seven vets’ recommendations. And if you also own a dog, or prefer four-legged friends of the canine variety, be sure to check out our picks for the best vet-recommended dog foods.

Best food for adult cats
Purina Pro Plan True Nature Natural Chicken & Turkey Entree in Gravy Canned Cat Food
Purina Pro Plan True Nature Natural Chicken & Turkey Entree in Gravy Canned Cat Food
$23
(was $29, now 21% off)
Cats generally require 200 to 250 calories per day, but this varies based on frame size, activity level, and whether your cat needs to lose or gain weight. Megan Shepherd, a veterinary nutritionist at the Virginia Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine at Virginia Tech, advises checking with your veterinarian for more specific guidance and consulting this body-condition score chart to see if your cat is under- or overweight. Because Purina employs full-time veterinary nutritionists and invests heavily in research and development, it’s a favorite brand of veterinarians like Cori Blair of Feline Health (a cats-only practice in New York City) and Valerie Parker, an associate professor of small-animal internal medicine and nutrition at Ohio State University’s College of Veterinary Medicine. “The meats in gravy are generally what I feed my cats,” says Blair, who explains that these flavors are usually palatable to most cats, which can help if you’re transitioning from dry to canned food. According to Pierson’s chart, this formula contains 57 percent protein, 37 percent fat, and 6 percent carbohydrates, so it meets the standards Berg recommends for healthy adult felines.

$23 for 24 at Amazon
$23 for 24 at Chewy
Weruva Paw Lickin' Chicken in Gravy Grain-Free Canned Cat Food
Weruva Paw Lickin' Chicken in Gravy Grain-Free Canned Cat Food
Berg points out that this chicken-in-gravy flavor from Weruva also hits her nutritional requirements. Although it’s labeled as “grain-free,” vets are wary of this marketing term that doesn’t necessarily mean the food is low in carbs. “If you think about grain-free pet food, they’re replacing those things with starches or a potato or a legume,” explains Cline, “and if the whole idea in the marketing of feeding grain-free food is because it’s not part of the natural diet of a cat, you just replaced it with other things that are also not part of the natural diet of the cat either.” This Weruva food is formulated with potato starch but contains only 3 percent carbohydrates (along with 65 percent protein and 32 percent fat), so if your cat likes the taste, it’s still a healthy choice.

$46 for 24 at Amazon
$46 for 24 at Chewy
Tiki Cat Puka Puka Luau Succulent Chicken in Chicken Consomme Grain-Free Canned Cat Food
Tiki Cat Puka Puka Luau Succulent Chicken in Chicken Consomme Grain-Free Canned Cat Food
If you browse Pierson’s list, you’ll see that Tiki Cat offers many healthy foods that are high in protein and low in carbs. Lots of Tiki Cat food is fish-flavored, which is extremely attractive to cats because of its salty taste, but vets like Berg and Becker actually discourage feeding cats fish because of its high iodine content, which could lead to hyperthyroidism. Fortunately, this all-chicken flavor is just as nutritious, with 77 percent protein, 23 percent fat, and no carbohydrates.

$18 for 12 at Chewy
Best (less expensive) food for adult cats
Fancy Feast Roasted Turkey Feast Canned Cat Food
Fancy Feast Roasted Turkey Feast Canned Cat Food
There’s nothing wrong with saving money on cat food as long as you’re picking a food that’s nutritionally sound. “A lot of people will say Fancy Feast is kind of the ‘McDonald’s for cats,’ but it’s actually not the case,” says Berg. “Plenty of the Fancy Feast [formulas] are actually quite high in protein and very low in carbohydrates.” With 56 percent protein, 38 percent fat, and only 6 percent carbs, this turkey flavor fits the bill. Since canned food is less calorically dense than dry food, feeding with it is generally more expensive, but you’ll likely save on medical care in the long term.

$17 for 24 at Amazon
$17 for 24 at Chewy
Best human-grade cat food
Smalls Turkey
Smalls Turkey
Request price at Smalls
NomNomNow Chicken Chow-Meow
NomNomNow Chicken Chow-Meow
Request price at NomNomNow
To further maximize your cat’s nutrition, Becker recommends looking for human-grade food, meaning it contains meat that has been approved by the USDA for human consumption. Most pet food is made from feed-grade meat, which, according to Becker, “means it’s lesser quality with potentially less-than-healthy ingredients.” Although human-grade pet food is generally more expensive and more difficult to find, some brands are starting to offer it for discerning cat owners. Small and NomNomNow are two relatively new, direct-to-consumer brands that use all-human-grade ingredients and formulate their food to cats’ ideal nutritional needs. If you’ve thought about feeding your cat a fresh- or raw-food diet but are concerned about food safety or convenience, a preservative-free, human-grade, commercial food is the next best thing, according to Becker. (I’ve given my cat a sample of NomNomNow, and she was a big fan.) Prices vary, as both companies offer customized portion sizes based on your cat’s age and weight.

Best food for senior cats
Weruva Truluxe On The Cat Wok with Chicken & Beef in Pumpkin Soup Grain-Free Canned Cat Food
Weruva Truluxe On The Cat Wok with Chicken & Beef in Pumpkin Soup Grain-Free Canned Cat Food
If you look at Pierson’s chart, you’ll see that the fourth column tracks how much phosphorus is in each food. This might not be the first thing you look for when shopping for your own food, but this mineral is actually very important in cat health. Berg says limiting phosphorus is crucial for senior cats, as too much of it can cause or worsen kidney disease, a common problem among older cats. Previously, vets would advise reducing protein in senior cats’ diets, but Berg contends that protein — and moisture — levels should stay high while reducing phosphorus. “It’s just that the phosphorus tends to go up as the protein goes up,” she says. “But there are some proteins that are higher in phosphorus than others.” So while there’s no AAFCO standard for senior cats, a low-phosphorus food (Berg says to try to stay under 200 milligrams per 100 calories) could benefit your cat that is ten years old or older. This nutritionally balanced Weruva food contains only 163 milligrams of phosphorus per 100 calories.

$40 for 24 at Amazon
$40 for 24 at Chewy
Best food for kittens
Royal Canin Mother & Babycat Ultra-Soft Mousse in Sauce Wet Cat Food
Royal Canin Mother & Babycat Ultra-Soft Mousse in Sauce Wet Cat Food
If you’re buying food for a kitten, make sure to look for the AAFCO nutritional-adequacy statement for growth. “Because kittens are growing and developing, they require more calories than adult cats do on a per-pound basis,” says Coates. “Kitten foods are generally higher in fat than are foods designed for adults to provide them with these extra calories.” Blair and Parker are both fans of Royal Canin, and the brand’s just-for-kittens food is packed with protein and fortified with all the vitamins and minerals the littlest kitties need to thrive.

Cats are the only asocial animal we have successfully domesticated. We’re disappointed that we don’t bond with them as easily as dogs. But are we just missing the signs?
Author image
By Stephen Dowling
25th October 2019
D

Dogs seem almost biologically incapable of hiding their inner moods – shuffling, snuffling, tail-wagging clues to contentment, nervousness or sheer, unadorned joy. Despite what the famous painting might want to tell you, dogs would be terrible poker players. We pick up their cues all too easily.

Cats also have sophisticated body language – their moods are signalled through twitching tails, ruffled fur, and the position of ears and whiskers. A purr usually (but not always) signals friendliness or contentment. They’re a usually reliable method of working out if the cat is in friendly mode or best left alone.

You might also like:

The complicated truth about a cat’s purr
Three ways cats can control our minds
Why dogs look like their owners
While we can reasonably be sure of a dog’s bond with us, despite the thousands of years domesticated cats have kept us company, they still suffer something of a bad PR image. The independence that many see as a bonus is seen by others as aloofness or selfishness. Their detractors claim they only really show affection when a food bowl is empty.

Cat owners will claim this is all nonsense, of course, and that their bond with their cat is as strong as any dog owner’s. But why does this image of the aloof, unfriendly cat remain? And is there any truth to it?

Cat being stroked (Credit: Getty Images)
Some people believe cats are only affectionate as a way of getting food (Credit: Getty Images)

At the very least, the image of the “independent” cat has done it little harm in terms of popularity as a pet. It’s thought there are as many as 10 million domestic cats in the UK alone. Some 25% of households were believed to have at least one cat when a study was undertaken in 2012.

One clue to the cat’s image may come from how they were domesticated in the first place. It was a much more gradual process than that of dogs – and cats were very much in the driving seat. The earliest domesticated cats started appearing in Neolithic villages in the Middle East around 10,000 years ago. They didn’t depend on their early human hosts for food – they were encouraged to fetch it themselves, keeping crops and food stores safe from rats and other vermin. Our relationship with them was, from the outset, a little more at arms’ length than dogs, who helped us hunt and relied upon humans for a share of the spoils.

Dogs and humans are very similar and have lived together a long time. In a way it has been co-evolution - Karen Hiestand
The cat that may be currently curled up on your sofa or glaring at you from its vantage point on top of the bookcase shares many of its instincts with that of its pre-domestic ancestors – the desire to hunt, to patrol territory, guarding it from other cat; they are much closer to their old selves than dogs. Our taming of cats has only partly removed them from the wild.

“Mostly, it’s just human misunderstanding of the species,” says Karen Hiestand, a vet and trustee of International Cat Care. “Dogs and humans are very similar and have lived together a long time. In a way it has been co-evolution. With cats, it is way more recent. They come from a solitary ancestor that isn’t a social species.”

The African wildcat we domesticated our housecats from, Felis lybica, tends to lead a solitary life, mostly meeting when it is time to mate. “Cats are the only asocial animal that’s been domesticated. Every other animal we’ve domesticated has a social bond with other members of its species.”

Cat being stroked (Credit: Getty Images)
When cats have their basic needs such as food and litter taken care of, they are more likely to seek out companionship (Credit: Getty Images)

Given that cats are such an outlier among the animals we live with, it’s no wonder that we might have been getting their signals wrong.

“Because they are so self-determined and can take care of themselves, cats are becoming more and more popular,” Hiestand says. “But whether the lifestyle suits them is another question. Humans are expecting cats to be like us and like dogs. And they aren’t.”

Research into cats’ emotions and sociability has long lagged behind that on dogs, but in recent times it has gathered pace. Much of it is in its early stages, but already research has shown that cats’ sociability towards humans is quite a complicated spectrum.

“It is highly variable, driven by genetics, and the sociability part can come from what they experience in the first six or eight weeks. If they have positive experiences in the early part of their lives, they’re probably going to like humans and want to hang out with us.”

Just like dogs, cats do a lot of communication with their bodies rather than through sound
Even the domestication of cats itself is a spectrum. Feral strays often hide or flee from humans, behaving far more like their wild ancestors. In places such as the Mediterranean and Japan, colonies of “community cats” thrive in fishing villages, friendly enough to ingratiate themselves with locals who feed them. In Istanbul, for instance, the semi-stray cats are fed and looked after by locals, and have become part of the city’s identity, even spawning a recent documentary film.

Then there are the cats that live with us, but even this subset is a spectrum; some keep a relative distance, while others positively thrive with human company.

So, if we’re wanting a strong bond with our cats, what should we be looking out for?

Just like dogs, cats do a lot of communication with their bodies rather than through sound. “I think it’s a lot harder for people to read their body language compared to dogs,” says Kristyn Vitale, a PhD researcher studying cat behaviour. That’s not necessarily the cat’s fault.

One vital feature may have allowed dogs to leapfrog cats to our affection. A study from Portsmouth University found that dogs have learned to mimic the expressions of infants, which triggers a desire to nurture in their human owners. The change seems to have been the development of a muscle which raises the inner eyebrow – and it’s not something found in their wolf ancestors. “Puppy dog eyes” aren’t just a cliché, they’re an evolutionary trick which has strengthened the bond between dogs and people.

Cat with half-closed eyes (Credit: Getty Images)
Slow blinking is a sign of affection from cats (Credit: Getty Images)

The bad news for cats? They lack this muscle. As a result, cats’ stares can look cold and unfriendly, and two cats staring at each other can often be a prelude for fisticuffs. But a slow blinking stare – one that your cat probably gives towards you from the other side of the room – is something else entirely; it’s their way of expressing love. Even turning their heads to one side isn’t necessarily disdain, but a sign of their relaxation.

Vitale draws attention to her study at Oregon State University, in which cats and dogs were left in a room by their owner, with the owner suddenly returning some time later. “One interesting thing is that the majority of cats who were secure with their owners, when they returned, they greeted them and went back to exploring the room, with little moments of coming back. Dogs did similar,” Vitale says. “If the dog has run around the room, playing with toys and occasionally coming back to the owner, we wouldn’t worry so much.” Researchers called this “secure attachment” – calmness when the owner returned, suggesting a strong emotional bond.

Relaxed cats are more likely to want to make friends
“Humans’ expectation bias for the animal impacts their behaviour,” says Vitale. By trying to force cats to behave more like dogs – showering us with attention – we’re trying to push them away from their natural behaviour.

Hiestand says that out historic inability to see cats’ temperament as different to dogs is part of the issue. Even experts with years of training are not immune. “I went to a conference in 2007 and felt like an absolute idiot,” she says. “There was all this basic information about cats that I didn’t know, such as that they like their water and their food in separate places. This research is all quite new, but once you have the humility that what you thought you knew about them is wrong, you start to learn stuff that’s interesting.”

Cat bumping nose with man (Credit: Getty Images)
If cats have positive contact with humans early on, they're more likely to want to form bonds with us (Credit: Getty Images)

Take the way cats rub themselves against their owners. This used to be thought of as a kind of territory marker, like wild cats might do on trees or other landmarks in their territory. But when they do it on people, it’s usually a sign of affiliation – the cat is transferring its scent onto your skin, and at the same time transferring yours onto its fur. This is what feral cats do with other cats they are allied with. It is a way of creating a “common scent” which distinguishes friend from foe.

Ultimately, Hiestand says, one thing is key – relaxed cats are more likely to want to make friends. “They want their water and their food and their sleeping arrangements and their litter tray just right, and when they are right, they’re able to start exploring those social bonds.”

So, the next time you come home to find a cat quietly surveying you from the couch, or lazily yawning as they pad their way into the hallway, don’t be disappointed. In their own, quiet way, they’re letting you know it’s good to see you.

--

Join one million Future fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter or Instagram.

If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called “The Essential List”. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife, and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.
